[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well welcome once again to
church history and theology as we delve
into the topic of the Jerusalem Council
if you have your Bible go ahead and grab
it we will be in Acts 14:15 and 16 and
and looking into the history of the
Jerusalem Council as they deal with the
subject of
Salvation it is perhaps not lost on many
of you that the church has gathered
together at many so-called councils or
cids or uh local uh local discussions
regarding uh all manner of theological
disputes uh the nature of Christ the
number of Wills of Christ the number of
natures of Christ the the the nature of
the hypostatic Union the the existence
of Christ before all things he's not the
first creation all sorts of other stuff
these types of councils and cids are
really not what we're dealing with today
at the Jerusalem Council the Jerusalem
Council is the only one that was
presided over by those who had the
authority of apostle uh there we will
find Peter we will find Paul uh we will
find all the Elders of the Jerusalem
Church including James the brother of uh
the brother of Jesus um all of these
people are there trying to address a
singular issue and that is nothing small
nothing in the corner of theology or
anything like that it is actually the
very heart of Salvation itself and so it
was necessitated that the apostles and
the elders joined together and kind they
came to a unanimous agreement on uh how
to deal with this particular issue
little bit of background uh the Year by
the way to get your setting is 49 ad uh
if you know your history you know that
this is the tail end of of Paul's first
missionary journey you know that the
Jews were being kicked out of Rome
around this time uh that all manner of
uh of changes over the next oh decade
and a half uh the the vast majority of
the New Testament would be written uh it
is actually quite fitting that this
discussion take place right here at the
cusp of this uh the cusp of uh Paul's
second and third missionary Journeys
where he founds the church in Corinth
and writes to the church in Rome and he
founds the church in Ephesus and stays
there for several years and um you know
the the the involvement of Peter uh
throughout Asia Minor after this um most
likely going through and teaching with
his own lips uh these Gentile Christians
uh in the Northern parts of Asia Minor
about the realities of Salvation coming
by grace through faith that is what this
Council joins together to talk about I
know it's easy to get into the weeds and
say oh it was just about circumcision
it's it wasn't just about circumcision
you'd say well the announcements from it
really only dealt with you know four
specific areas that uh the Jerusalem
Church had the Gentile Christians
observe but it's a lot deeper than that
there's a lot more going on here and I
really want you to see it because it's
one of those things that gets passed by
quickly and it really shouldn't but the
central issue of the Jerusalem Council
is salvation and the nature of the
Gospel itself how is it we are saved how
is it Gentile Christians are saved how
is it Jewish Christians are saved and
what things are Central what things are
not what things if they are being
insisted upon should be rejected
what things can you do as Ministry
Decisions by the way as extensions of
Fellowship between differing bodies of
Christians already you can see patterns
developing in how Christians should view
Christians of a completely different
background uh I believe we have a great
Paradigm here for how denominationalism
should function uh as we go through
church history you will see the
denominations arise from largely from
simply just cultural differences
whether that be languages whether that
be uh nation states uh you you have even
in the Protestant World you'll see this
but you see it very very well played out
in the Eastern Orthodox Churches where
you just have churches that are attached
to specific States even in the even the
Protestant World though we have this we
have the Church of England and
anglicanism and episcopalianism that
comes out of that and you know uh After
the Revolutionary War and the uh
relationships there getting all strained
but you have Presby iism which is as
Scottish as it gets you have the
Reformed Church which is Swiss uh you
have the Baptist Church which is born
out of the Church of England and Finds
Its home significantly in the Americas
uh in America you have methodism uh you
you have things like this uh obviously
this is not a a full uh story
Lutheranism is as German as it gets but
then so is it when it goes uh to the
Norse
countries this this whole
discussion about denominationalism and
different refences and Theological
emphases Here There and
whatnot there's a larger concept that
sits behind this and that is the nature
of
Salvation if somebody if a church is
truly a Christian Church they teach the
gospel those who are part of it are
Christians uh not because of the
institution but because of the grace of
God is preached there the scriptures are
preached and they came through faith to
Salvation in Christ
they will have a different flavor than
somebody in a country that has done the
same uh that's in a different country
and that is perfectly okay and I believe
that there are differences on purpose we
are not here to try to find a way that
all Christians are
uniform um some people have taken this
concept that you know perhaps
denominationalism or we have these
separations already here in the book of
Acts between Gentile and Jewish
Christians though there's no Unity here
if we hold it separate so we need to
find a way to smash them all together
and make them all have some like uniform
Christian culture that's not possible
it's not possible and so we have though
a paradigm I think here in Acts 15 for
how is it we are to interact and I I I
paus to even use the term ecumenicalism
or or ecumenism because it's been so
misused in our day but how is is it that
we Bridge gaps between denominations if
not by following a Biblical example to
do so um and I'm going to put forward
that we have actually a really good
biblical example here to do so it is not
to say that our differences do not
matter they do that's okay but it to say
that the gospel should never be placed
on the same level as those things that
are different between us especially just
cultural differences so let's let's dive
into this I think it's super important
for us to look into uh grab your Bibles
um acts 15 but we're going to back up
just a couple of verses to get a running
start into this to kind of get the
setting if you don't have your Bible but
you are watching the video version of
this I'll have it here on the
screen Paul and Barnabas are returning
back uh from uh Paul's first missionary
journey uh and verse 24 in Acts 14 to
kind of just get the setting here they
passed through pdia and came to pamilia
and when they had spoken the word in
perga they went down to ad uh Italia and
from there they sailed to
Antioch Antioch it says where they had
been commended by to the grace of God
for the work that they had fulfilled
when they arrived and gathered the
church together they declared all that
God had done with them and how he had
opened a Door of Faith to the Gentiles
and there remained no little time with
the disciples there um really important
to get this setting because uh Paul has
just come off of seeing Gentiles come to
Faith in Christ over and over and over
again in all manner of different regions
and all manner of different cities and
he is watching the spirit of God move
through the world something that in the
book of Acts we get glimpses of but
really before this only a few right we
have the story of
Cornelius uh with with Peter and
Cornelius we have uh a couple of these
issues we have some of the earlier uh
preachings of of Paul um you know
obviously he's not um you know he's not
received very well in lisra and gets
stoned there uh and things like this but
there is something really focused about
how Paul is spending his time uh with
Gentiles and preaching the gospel which
is one I find quite ironic as a former
Pharisee um but also it is it is quite
fitting that God would take him and show
the nature of the Gospel to Gentiles by
this one who used to be a Hebrew of all
Hebrews
let's go back to
it acts
15 but some men came down from Judea and
were teaching the brothers
saying unless you are circumcised
according to the custom of Moses you
cannot be
saved this is why I say the central
issue here is not circumcision but
Salvation itself the relation of the law
to Salvation how is it the grace of God
Has Come has it just come in giving us a
law and now it is up to us to follow it
or has the grace of God come and we
receive it through
faith this really becomes the central
theme because if you are to be
circumcised in the way that the
circumcision party here are putting
forward then this obligates you to keep
the whole law indeed that is the entire
argument of the book of Galatians that
Paul writes um there's many that argue
he wrot he wrote it before this Council
I actually hold that he wrote it as a
result of this Council afterwards um
neither here nor there it's pretty much
irrelevant at this point he may have
even written it while he was here in
Antioch In this passage um we're not
entirely certain on that um but what we
can say is this dealing exactly with the
same problem and it certainly was
written either right before or right
after the uh the Jerusalem Council and
is dealing with this issue saying look
circumcision it cannot value
anything if you are doing it in a way
that is saving
yourself you cannot just go out and say
that somehow I have to not only trust in
Christ but I also have to keep the
entire law otherwise I can't be saved
what kind of Salvation is
that right saved from your sins but you
have to stop sinning in order for your
sins to not exist that's kind of the
whole problem of the law right it was a
burden that was too much for anyone to
carry that was a mere man right let's
keep going unless you are circumcised
they said according to the custom of
Moses you cannot be saved and after Paul
and Barnabas had no small dissension and
debate with them Paul and Barnabas and
some of the others were appointed to go
up to Jerusalem to the apostles and the
elders about this question now that's
really uh that's really important
because What's Happening Here is that
the teachings are floating around in in
Syria and in uh Antioch and Paul and
Barnabas happened to run straight and
headlong into it uh they had just come
back imagine this setting in their mind
they had just come back from Watching
God do marvelous works of Salvation
through faith amongst the Gentile lands
and they're coming back to Jerusalem
kind of like giving this huge report of
uh how marvelous it is that the gospel
is going out and they just get brick
walled by this this this slog of a
teaching of no no no no no don't forget
all Gentile Christians in order to have
this salvation have to keep the of
Moses and as it says here Paul and
Barnabas uh here in verse two had no
small dissension in debate with them uh
they and some of the others were
appointed to go up to Jerusalem to the
apostles and Elders about this question
now this is one of the reasons why I say
um Paul I would argue writes Galatians
after the councel because while he
disagreed and held the position of the
book of Galatians before the the council
he he doesn't just site himself alone to
deal with this he's dealing with this
but he's saying we're going to take this
question straight to the council um or
straight to the apostles and the elders
in Jerusalem uh to see what's going on
because as we find out later in the
passage they were being supposedly sent
out from the church in Jerusalem
teaching these things and Paul and
Barnabas are like there's no way that
Peter and all of them and James are
sending this teaching out let's go talk
to the elders and the apostles there in
Jerusalem and so in verse three so it
says being sent on their way by the
church they passed through both
Phoenicia and Samaria describing in
detail the conversion of the Gentiles
and brought great joy to all the
brothers again this the conversion of
the Gentiles uh their salvation being
proclaimed what a marvelous thing when
they came to Jerusalem they were
welcomed by the church and the apostles
and the elders and they declared all
that God had done with them but some
Believers now notice these are
Christians some believers who belonged
to the party of the Pharisees rose up
and said quote it is necessary to
circumcise them and to order them to
keep the law of Moses now we have the
full story and we also have the source
of who had sent these people out uh to
teach these things in Antioch and Syria
and uh the regions Beyond uh these are
Christians who had come to see Christ as
the true Messiah but they were Pharisees
present
tense so they were Christians who
belonged to the party of the Pharisees
they were the ones saying not only is it
necessary to circumcise them but then
the full teaching comes out it's not
just that one part of this not just an
initiating right into the law of Moses
but they have to be ordered to keep the
ENT ire law of Moses that would include
everything
everything dietary
restrictions uh uh supposedly there
would be all manner of um um aspects of
the excuse me all manner of aspects of
the way that uh Passover is remembered
uh aspects about how the um how the
personal life how their uh family
functioned uh all manner of things that
really not only were just moral things
but were really far more ceremonial and
really more Civic and civil things and
that was that's something that I think a
lot of people tend to forget is that the
law had a real Purpose with regards to
the nation of Israel and that was its
law code you can't just slap that on top
of a gentile living underneath a
different law code it it doesn't it
doesn't work like that that you'll have
all sorts of disagreements everywhere
right and so we see immediately that we
have Christians that are of the party of
the Pharisees they rose up and they said
it is necessary to circumcise them and
to order them to keep the law of Moses
uh now a simple word on this you can't
keep the law of Moses in this manner and
call it
salvation that's kind of the whole point
of the nature of the Gospel Christ kept
this we need a righteousness that
exceeds uh according to Matthew 5 the
righteousness of the scribes and the
Pharisees it needs to be a righteousness
far greater and far better than anything
they've ever produced by circumcising
themselves and keeping the law of Moses
um so this is not a small thing and nor
is it a new discussion either in fact
the Pharisees had challenged Jesus um
that he was laying aside and abolishing
the law and the prophets and Christ
comes and says not doing that um in fact
I there will not be a single uh jot or
tit of the law and the prophets say set
aside until it all comes to pass until
it's all fulfilled and that was what
Jesus was doing fulfilling all
righteousness and fulfilling the purpose
of the prophets the prophecies made
about him and all of these things right
and he brought to its culmination the
law of Moses the very point that the law
came was to show us we are aren't the
Salvation we are waiting for someone
else
is and now that Christ has come the law
having enacted its purpose has
changed these Christians who belong to
the party of the Pharisees were
pretending on some level or imagining on
some level and most likely just
tradition imagine that it hasn't changed
how could it not change with Christ here
right look at verse six here the
apostles and the elders were gathered
together to consider this matter and
after there had been much debate Peter
stood up and said to them brothers you
know that in the early days God made a
choice among you that by my mouth the
Gentiles would hear the word of the
gospel and believe now this is really
interesting because at another Point
Peter is actually called the Apostle to
the Jews and uh the Apostle to the
circumcision and pet and Paul is called
the apostles to the Gentiles but here
Peter makes very clear earlier in the
story we have already run into this
discussion where Peter was used
specifically as he was down by uh the
sea in Simon the Tanner's house uh to
learn about how God was going to save
the Gentiles and it was not by making
them Jewish it was not by making them
follow the Civil laws of the uh of the
nation of Israel it was not by having
them follow the law of Moses
but that whole story of Cornelius back
in chapter 10 in the book of Acts is
brought up and he says look he says God
who knows the heart bore witness to them
speaking of Gentiles right by giving
them the Holy Spirit just as he did to
us and he meaning
God the spirit made no distinction
between us and them having cleansed
their hearts through
faith this is how the gospel is received
it is not by circumcision I'm sorry even
for some who teach on baptism of
regeneration it is not through baptism
it is not through the church it is not
through anything else it is through the
faith that God
gifts the grace of God comes and
cleanses the hearts of unbelievers
through faith that is the only me ISM of
Salvation to add anything else to that
messes it all
up book of Galatians going to make that
very clear so is the Jerusalem Council
look at verse 10 now therefore Peter
asked them why are you putting God to
the test by placing a yoke on the neck
of the disciples that neither are
fathers nor we have been able to Bear
now this is really fascinating
because as Peter is talking about these
things he is referring to uh not just
circumcision but he is referring to the
entirety of the law to the entirety of
keeping the Mosaic law which
circumcision obligates you to do so he's
arguing that Not only was Israel unable
to do this but so were we in fact so so
is
everybody the requirement to keep Old
Testament laws in in
fact Paul who is standing there at this
Jerusalem Council will later write in
the book of Galatians that the Old
Testament law is saying that Christians
need to keep them in order to be saved
is referring to it as a yoke of
slavery we we do not have salvation by
lawke keeping in fact I will simply put
out there salvation has never been by
lawke keeping but that's a whole another
discussion for another time
here the whole point of the law has come
to its for with the Advent of Christ he
has fulfilled these things now the grace
of God has appeared and it trains us for
righteousness not the law Grace trains
us for righteousness that's Titus 2 and
here this whole concept is is based on
the fact that it is not through the law
that God has brought this salvation it
is through his grace and it is through
Christ
right because he says the same thing
about Jewish
Christians verse 11 well first verse 10
right you you're trying to place a yoke
on the neck of the disciples that
neither our fathers nor we have been
able to Bear verse 11 but we believe
that we will be saved through the grace
of our Lord Jesus just as they
will and all the assembly fell silent
I find
it I find it
noteworthy that the issue that was
present at the Jerusalem Council was the
center of Salvation the very gospel
itself that there were those who are
going out trying to add something to
Christ which we learn from Paul in
Galatians uh right after this is writing
if you add anything to Christ then
Christ is of no value either he is your
savior
or he is not he cannot be most of your
savior and you add in what's lacking he
is not lacking in
anything it is a misunderstanding to
think that some level in in Salvation is
needing to be performed by me in order
to actually earn it in order to keep it
or any of these
things it says here in verse 12 that the
assembly all fell silent and they
listened to Barnabas and to Paul as they
related what signs and wonders God had
done through them among the Gentiles
again same thing with Simon or with with
Peter here right the way it was with
Cornelius and then Paul comes in and
says man that has continued throughout
the
world God is not saving them through S
through a Salvation supposedly of
circumcision and lawke
keeping in fact the Pharisees always had
this wrong God was not saving people
through lawke keeping he was showing
them who they were through lawke keeping
that they would call on him for
salvation James by the way who is about
to speak up uh at this uh I'm teaching a
a series on James right now James
doesn't teach on lawke keeping a saving
either he actually discusses with Jewish
Christians this reality that now having
come to faith in Christ the law has
become a law of Liberty you can still
look into that perfect law as mirror and
see who you
are but Salvation has come through faith
that works into the
world and it's only enacted by these
things that are called gifts it is not
something that we have
manufactured continuing on in verse um
13 after they had finished speaking
James
replied this is James the brother of the
Lord author of the book of James by the
way written a few years before this most
likely Brothers listen to me Simeon
Peter has related to uh how God first
visited the Gentiles to take from them a
people for his
name and with this the words of the
prophets agree just as it is written and
here he quotes Amos after this I will
return and I will rebuild the tent of
David that is Fallen I will rebuild its
ruins and I will restore it that the
remnant of mankind May seek the Lord and
all the Gentiles who are called by my
name says the Lord who makes these
things known from of
old therefore he says my judgment is
that we should not trouble those of the
Gentiles who turn to
God uh and he's going to give a list of
things right here I I want to come back
to that in just a second I want to talk
about this uh up here just a little
bit this concept exep right here in
verse
14 Simeon has related how God first
visited the Gentiles to take from them a
people for his
name it is
significant that James one of the main
teachers and Elders of the church in
Jerusalem is pointing this
out that it is God who is doing this it
is God who is visiting the Gentiles it
is God who is is taking from among the
peoples of the world a
people singular group
terminology he is pulling out of all the
Gentile Nations a singular
people and he's saying this is something
the prophets
foretold and he quotes there from Amos 9
that there
is this remnant of mankind seeking the
Lord and all the Gentiles who are called
by my name says the Lord who makes these
things known from of
old he's going to rebuild these things
he's going to take it
up rebuild the tent of David that has
fallen I will rebuild his ruins I will
restore it that the remnant of mankind
May seek the Lord and all the Gentiles
who are called by my name says the Lord
who makes these things known from of
old James's reasoning here is to say
therefore my judgment is that we should
not trouble those of the Gentiles who
turn to
God we shouldn't trouble those who turn
to God who are of the Gentiles now again
significant because here we are talking
about one of the main Elders of the
church in Jerusalem saying we should not
be adding anything into the pathway that
can trip up those who are Gentiles they
are fellow
believers they have turned to God we
should not trouble
them you say well they dress differently
than us okay they eat differently than
us
okay they sing differently than us
okay so
what what effect is
that you said well it's it's difficult
for me to get over it okay then do the
difficult work get over it people are
different than you one of the
responsibilities of Fellowship is to
keep in mind the Scruples of other
people so long as it can not infringe
upon one's
freedom but then on the other side it is
also to keep in mind that they are
different than you they have freedom
too there is there is a responsibility
that we have towards one another to keep
our um our reasonable needs and
preferences in mind but we're not going
to keep the unreasonable ones on that
mess up the
gospel and this is exactly where the
brothers in Jerusalem go to this is
great wisdom I want you to see
this James says to them in verse 20 you
should uh we should write to them to
abstain watch this list one to abstain
from the things polluted by Idols two
from sexual
immorality three from what has been
strangled and four from blood
four now he's going to give the reason
in just a second so these four things
are quite fascinating right these four
things abstain from what is been
sacrificed to Idols uh abstained from
blood uh from what has been strangled
and from sexual immorality three of them
have to do with very plainly um dietary
restrictions
here food offered to
Idols now you can read the full
disclaimer of how
Peter deals with this with the um with
the church in Corinth uh in 1
Corinthians chapter 8 if you really want
to deal with that um but as far as for
these Gentile Believers um what is being
recommended by James is that we
encourage them to uh not eat food
offered to Idols especially when you're
living near or or in in um or in League
with or next to in a city Jewish belie
Bel not because you are saved by
avoiding things polluted by Idols no nor
are you saved from avoiding sexual
immorality nor are you saved from
avoiding food that has been strangled or
or or food with it or the meat with his
blood in it you're not saved from these
things these things do not provide
salvation this is not what James is
saying what he is saying is for the sake
of your Jewish brothers that are actual
Christians
just like those who are of the Pharisee
party who are believers who are brothers
here in Jerusalem right we have all
manner of different types of people
inside the Christian Church Jewish and
Gentile and different flavors of
both for the sake of those who are
Jewish
Believers abstain from these four
things as a Ministry decision as a
fellowship accommodation as love for
your other brother others and it should
be fine right he says um he says the
reasoning for this is because in verse
21 from the ancient Generations Moses
has had in every city those who Proclaim
him for he has read every Sabbath in the
synagogues again the reason for this is
the presence of Jews that are Christians
this is not on behalf of all the Jews
this is on behalf of Jewish Brothers
it's very important to iction to be made
here this is a fellowship decision right
this is a fellowship we're about to see
an evangelism decision that's different
but as far as for a fellowship decision
there's a
limit right abstain from things that are
are real tabos and dietary ones are
massive ones especially when it comes to
things that are polluted by Idols look a
gentile Christian you know doesn't have
a natural problem with this but a Jewish
Christian does okay if you're with a
Jewish Christan Christian just don't ask
where the m has come from obviously
they're not going to have anything like
that but if you're with someone else
just just avoid the topic you can see
how Paul will actually reason through
this in 1 Corinthians uh 8 and Beyond um
but it's really important to see another
one of these sexual immorality now
that's a weird one is how is that a
fellowship decision there's certain
things that are abor to the Jewish
Christian mindset that are not naturally
abor to the Gentile Christian mindset
and so keep those things in mind if if
you're okay with something that's more
oh oh goodness I'll just put one in here
now I'm just going to say this is trying
to explain the passage I'm not trying to
um put this in here but to Simply say uh
if you are okay with less clothing than
they're okay with then just cover up
more just a just a bit just keep it in
mind right and when it comes to any
practice in that area just keep it in
mind if it's not something that is uh
intensely uh seen as sinful by you and
you disagree over it just keep it in
mind right keep all of these things in
mind abstain from things polluted by
Idols abstain from sexual
immorality right even if you're culture
say you're an Ephesus or whatever is is
free and it doesn't really bother you
and maybe even as Christians you have
had your consciences seared so
much abstain from these
things stay back from them now are you
saved by not doing doing sexually
immoral things no you're not saved by
lawke keeping you're saved by the grace
of God through the faith in Christ right
and look at these other ones abstain
from what has been strangled this is
this is an improper way in Jewish
dietary restrictions uh to uh to Harvest
Meat shall you say uh and also from uh
from blood or from eating blood that's
inside the meat right again you're
dealing with different practices in
different lands that uh while Jews live
amongst them they have a real hard time
being anywhere near that and so this is
really for the sake of your Jewish
Brothers keep these things in
mind
right keep these things in mind verse 22
uh then it seemed good to the apostles
and the elders with the whole church to
choose men from among them and send them
to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas they
sent Judas who's called Barabas and
Silas Leading Men among the brothers uh
with the following letter now here's the
letter
the brothers both the apostles and the
elders to the brothers who are of the
Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and cissa
greetings since we have heard that some
persons have gone out from us and
troubled you with words unsettling your
minds although we have gave them no such
instructions it has seemed good to us
having come to one Accord to choose men
and send them to you with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul men who have risked
their lives for the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ
we have therefore sent Judas and Silas
who themselves will tell you the same
things by Word of Mouth for it seemed
good to the Holy Spirit and to us to lay
on you no greater burden than these
requirements one that you abstain from
what has been sacrificed to idols and
from blood and from what has been
strangled and from sexual immorality if
you keep yourself from these things you
will do well
farewell now that's
it's a very short letter straight into
the
point right straight into the point they
are addressing this this issue directly
with no frills uh we did not send thems
they're not preaching in our name they
are not preaching with our Authority or
any such thing uh not not Authority so
much as we didn't send them we gave them
no instructions to do this uh and so we
wanted to choose men who will come and
reiterate this to you uh we'll send a
letter verifying that it's from
us here's the four things and they
actually clarify them a little bit
better than James did um not just uh
from what has been polluted by Idols but
that which has been sacrificed to Idols
they actually use a different term here
from blood from what has been strangled
and from sexual immorality keep yourself
from these things you will do well
farewell it says when they were sent off
they went down to Antioch
and having gathered the congregation
there they delivered the letter verse 31
when they read it they rejoiced because
of its
encouragement and Judas and Silas who
were themselves
prophets now again prophets uh in the
New Testament had all manner of uh
purposes here uh we won't get
sidetracked by that they were themselves
prophets they encouraged and strengthen
the brothers with many words and after
they had spent some time they were sent
off in Peace by the brothers to those
who had sent them but Paul and Barnabas
remained in Antioch teaching and
preaching the word of the Lord with many
others
also uh then we have that separation
between Paul and Barnabas and then we're
going to talk about Timothy and Paul
here in just a second but I want you to
see these things
right I also want you to see a whole
another aspect see this from the Jewish
Christian Perspective uh the the story
The Narrative always presents this um by
the Gentile Christian narrative but I
want you to see it from the Jewish
Christian narrative notice what is
lacking you say well there's there's
like three dietary things and then
there's sexual immorality stuff U which
should be like an agreed upon thing
across the board right well U Gentile
Christians were dealing with some things
pretty significant as we even see in 1
Corinthians um but neither here nor
there we're talking about a very early
uh instance of the church
here where's the
Sabbath did you notice its
absence he doesn't tell them they don't
tell them to observe the sabbath in
deference to the Jews no because it was
the Jews that were observing the Sabbath
Jewish Christians should be observing
the Lord's day not the
Sabbath Hebrews 4 makes it quite clear
uh Christians have entered their Sabbath
rest that shadow that type has been
fulfilled in Christ we are now in an age
of rest something that the Sabbath has
looked forward to since well before the
Mosaic Covenant and even the noic
Covenant all the way back to the first
week of
creation the world looked forward to
this rest Joshua promised rest all of
these things but they never saw
it even the Sabbath was a prefigurement
of the rest that we have in Christ and
that's I think so Central to all of this
is that the whole point is that we have
now entered our Sabbath rest we have
entered this time of rest with
Christ it is very difficult I imagine
for the Jewish Christians and for the
Gentile Christians to find a way to live
next to each other because you cannot
insist that the Jews become Gentiles nor
can you insist that the Gentiles become
Jews the gospel can actually save both
of them where they
are and that's okay
it is okay that they are different than
each other it is okay that they have
different practices God is working on
them you say well we need to get
everything squared away and all the
things right all the way at the at the
very first moment and everything can be
settled out but that's not how the Lord
Works he doesn't sanctify us instantly
he saves Us by his grace through our
faith in
him but our Salvation does not enact
perfect Holiness in our lives
immediately nor does it pull us out of
our
cultures right Gentile culture had so
many things that were repugnant to Jews
at a visceral level that here James is
just saying look first of all there's no
way that we're going to change the
definition of salvation to make Jewish
Christians comfortable but we should
keep in mind each other's Scruples at
least on some level to a limit but on
some
level right
right when it comes to Fellowship we
should be outdoing one another and
showing honor we should be uh giving in
our allowance towards others and their
lack of Scruples in areas that we have
Scruples we should also be keeping in
mind uh our own uh Freedom uh in light
of those who have more rules than us and
so like for instance if I'm okay um with
oh I don't know
I if if I'm okay oh let's take one I'm
in America right so since prohibition we
had this new one added in if if I'm okay
with with consuming um uh a drink of
alcohol right and then I have another
Christian that I know is not okay with
that I I'm not doing it in front of him
that's just putting a stumbling block
for no reason why would I do that but if
he's not around and it doesn't bother me
any and this is not a Salvation issue
and it's not expressly spelled out as a
sin somewhere in scripture it's not
going to bother me right same thing with
eating vegetables right Romans 14 deals
with this in grave detail right it's it
the Kingdom of Heaven is not about
eating and drinking and and new moons
and this day and that day and holy days
and high days and low days and normal
days it's not about all that it's just
not about all
that right those who make it about that
are making it less about Christ and more
about themselves that the harshest
language is used in the book of
Galatians to condemn that kind of
thinking uh off the bat but here we have
definitive Expressions here that what we
lay aside in Christian service towards
other Christians is
important we have to be mindful of these
things it doesn't mean that we do it so
that we put ourselves up as more
righteous than the other no that's
nonsense who cares about who has more
righteous than the other one we all have
Christ let us be satisfied with
him but that is the main purpose here
the Jewish Christians weren't saying
that the Gentile Christians should keep
our Scruples in matter they were saying
if they are not circumcised they cannot
be
saved salvation by grace through
faith
is largely
defined by the resistance that the
church in Jerusalem has against those
Jewish Christians who are placing that
on top of them including those who were
saved among the uh Pharisee party
guidelines of release for Gentile
Believers keeping in mind the the
cultural backdrop of your Jewish
Brothers if this were going the other
way the same type of thing would come
down Jews keep in mind the the uh
backdrop of your Gentile Brothers right
that's just not what's going on here in
this instance and so the guidelines are
being given to the Gentile Believers for
this I
believe what we see in here is a pattern
for
denominationalism they are not insisting
that Jews act like Gentiles they're not
insisting that Gentiles act like Jews
they are insisting that they respect one
another and that the gospel of the grace
of God has come to each of them showing
no
distinction in fact that's the exact
language excuse me that Peter
uses right God has made no distinction
between us and them having cleansed
their hearts by faith the same as
ours he gave them the Holy Spirit just
as he did to
us if they are truly trusting in
Christ and placing their faith in his
finished
work they can be wrong on a whole lot of
stuff they are still my
brother they are still my
sister you say well you know the way
they worship on Sunday looks very
different than you it does this they do
that they do you can be wrong on many
things I am wrong on many
things you say well maybe they should
have this exact christology we can talk
about all the
things if we do not start at
this that salvation is not something we
accomplish through uh making sure our
church observations are right or our
poity is lined up or our denominations
are structured a certain way or our
Scruples are a certain set or we do all
the right things or believe all the
right things or vote all the right ways
we have lost the gospel of grace if we
make this a Salvation issue
you want to say oh keep this scruple in
Minds keep that one in mind because of
the sake of uh your Christian Brothers
oh no problem we will talk about that we
will consider each other's needs and
each other's uh issues so we don't put
stumbling blocks in the way of anyone in
fact I would take even the harshest tack
that even Paul takes and says look if my
brother is offended by what I eat
because he can't even handle me eating
meat he's a vegetarian I'll just eat
vegetables right there's so many more
important things going on than being
right and Christian Fellowship is one of
those is not to say that I do not like
Theology and I don't like being right
man I love theology I love being right
more than just about anyone else but
there are more important things and the
gospel is more important than being
theologically
accurate it just is you're going to die
with inaccuracies in your theology so
will
I but no one lives without the
gospel and if we make the gospel so
complicated that nobody can really
Define
it make a
mistake now that goes as far as for
Christian Ministry I don't know if you
ever noticed in the very next section
right after acts 15 right as the
Jerusalem Council leaves and Paul and
Barnabas take their separate ways um and
Judas and Silas take their leave from
Antioch and so forth watch
this in the very next chapter Paul came
also to Derby and to lisra a disciple
was there named Timothy Great Name by
the way awesome name the son of a Jewish
woman who was a Believer but his father
was a Greek he was well spoken of by the
brothers at liser and Iconium Paul
wanted Timothy to accompany him and he
took him and circumcised him because of
the Jews who were in those places for
they all knew that his father was a
Greek did Paul just violate the very
Council that he was
at what in the world is happening didn't
we just have a council here to make sure
that circumcision and all of this kind
of stuff was not required of of uh
Gentile Christians yet here we have a
Jewish Gentile Christian and Paul is
circumcising him in the very next
sentence
why again here we have a distinction
Paul is not circumcising him for the
sake of Jewish Brothers he is
circumcising him as a Ministry decision
in
evangelism the Jews in the area around
where he lived knew that his father was
Greek and therefore himself would not
have been circumcised not able to preach
the gospel to them because he was
uncircumcised this is a very extreme uh
version of Let's go ahead and make these
changes let's go ahead and circumcise
Timothy uh in order for him to preach
the gospel to
them this is Paul actually
upholding believe it or not that
circumcision
avails
nothing it doesn't accomplish anything
he's not teaching Timothy put your faith
in this he's not saying okay when we go
on this now you're keeping all the no no
no it is not the act of circumcision
that obligates you to keeping the whole
law it is placing your faith in
circumcision that obligates you to keep
the whole law Timothy is already a
Christian he is not doing this to be
saved that's what the Gentile that's
what the Jewish party was teaching
here Paul is expressing this with
Timothy as a point because there's so
many Jews that needed evangelizing to
and Paul was going to be running into
them all the time and so was
Timothy in fact given the fact of all of
this he expresses very next
verse as they went through uh went on
their way through the cities they
delivered to them the observ the
observance uh for observance the
decisions that had been reached by the
apostles and the elders who were in
Jerusalem so the church were
strengthened in faith and they increase
their numbers
daily I find it fascinating this
Jerusalem Council it gives us a a a
picture back into how the apostles made
decisions um how they came to agreement
on things their unanimous consent their
agreeance their upholding of the Gospel
the salvation of the grace of God
through faith
and that it is not through lawke
keeping that means anyone for the rest
of church history that teaches otherwise
is not in
accord with the apostles and the Elders
of
Jerusalem salvation is not found through
all of these rules and
regulations salvation is not found you
will notice through baptism
salvation is found through the grace of
God and the giving of the spirit of God
and the cleansing of our hearts through
faith that is how salvation has come to
us if salvation is preached in some
other way then you are no longer in
accord with the apostolic
Doctrine this will go on to be clarified
over and over and over and over again in
the New Testament now
understand most likely only about the
book of James is written at this point
and then all of a sudden we're going to
have tons of things written uh I believe
the Book of Galatians is written very
soon
thereafter dealing with the same thing
or right beforehand either way it is
dealing with the same topic and
expressing look there has never been a
time where the keeping of the law was
the way through which you got the spirit
of God ever not from the beginning not
now not ever
and these things are important for us to
remember as we go through church history
those who have the Gospel of Jesus
Christ who have their faith in him are
believers and brothers those who do not
are
not those who teach a different gospel
ought to be warned against those who
teach the same gospel even though they
look dress eat think talk and do things
differently than us are our brothers and
sisters and we should give deference to
one another
and outdo one another in showing honor
may the Lord bless you all wherever you
are in this Grand world see you next
time
[Music]
oh